# December 13, 2020

I'm starting my journal today of the port to 8086 and 8088 class
machines (and maybe 80186 and 80286 machines as well). This is a
16-bit port of the 7th Edition of Unix to 8088 and 8086 machines. This
has been done before (one of the first half dozen ports was to a 8088
machine that had custom MMU inside of bell labs). This port is w/o a
MMU, so there will be no shared libraries nor any protection between
processes. This is unthinable in today's rather hostile world, but
will put to good use my old DEC Rainbow and maybe I'll learn a thing
or two along the way.

I've started this port half a dozen times in the past. Only to find
that something got in the way. Maybe something will again, maybe not.
The usual issue is that pcc, bcc or the other compilers I used weren't
quite up to the task, or had other issues that I didn't want to fight
with.

So, the other night I wrote a Makefile and started hacking together
low.s (a combination of l.s and mch.s) sufficient to get things
building. I made as few changes as possible to V7 to get it to compile
with the ia16-gcc fork (based on gcc 6.3.0) I've selected for this
effort. Everything was stubbed out, except that I wrote the stupid
version of spl*, cli and sti.

I also created a conf.c that's inspired by the c.c from V7, but with
ifdefs instead of a program to generate it. Venix/86 did this (and
maybe Venix/11 did too, we'll never know as its source is lost).

Appraoching it this way, I hope to leverage this port to late attempts
at getting 2.9 and/or 2.11BSD running, as well as V7M and Ultrix-11
from DEC. This is another reason I want to keep changes small and as
close to the original as possible: this family of Unixes is not so
distantly related at the lowest levels, so porting from one to the
other won't be too onerous I hope.

I also improted Robert Nordier's v7/x86 drivers. This should save me a
little time, though I will have to rearrnage them a bit or more to
cope with the differences between the environments, as well as a need
to cope with XT level hardware instead of the more modern AT in a 8086
box fiction that I'm starting with.

The size with everything stubbed out and Robert's drivers substituted
for the PDP-11 drivers results:
```
% ia16-elf-size unix
   text	   data	    bss	    dec	    hex	filename
  31448	    548	  15256	  47252	   b894	unix
```
Though that will no doubt change as things are stubbed out. This is also
with all the PDP-11 specific C bits (machdep.c, for example).

That leads me to a bit of a conundrum I need to solve. How do I go in
and change things in the main OS that are really MD but are in a MI
location. Historically, things have been broken down into a MI/MD
split (BSD) or complete copies were made for the port and never merged
(AT&T though at least SYS Vr1).

The first thing that must change is the U area. I'll need to figure
out where to store/map it, and will need to start hacking on it to
make it i86 specific. Judging from the entant sources that have
surived from 8086 ports and clones, I'll need to make changes to the U
area before I can even start to write the basics of copyin, copyout, or
the simpler fetch/store user word or byte (both data and instruction).

Simpler should be how to deal with the compiler generated calls for
div/mul/mod. Those I likely can grab, with caution, from the ia16-gcc
efforts since it includes libraries.

So up next: write the in*/out* primitives, bzero. Once I have those,
I'll jump into the u area.

Oh, and likely imaging: I'll need to write a boot loader, or borrow
one from elsewhere. And create an image I can test and jigger up qemu
to do that testing. And likely add triggers to github/gitlab to do
some level of CI testing on each commit. ah, but much of that is in
the far future.




